In just six years,
Argentina, my beautiful home country,
went from barely having
renewable energy on its grid
to one where on some days
nearly 40 percent of its electricity
comes from wind and solar.
And this happened in a country
globally recognized
for its political and economic crisis.
Home of a world-class oil and gas industry
with the fourth-largest shale oil reserve
and the second-largest
shale gas reserve in the world.
You might be wondering,
how was that possible?
And how can we replicate this
all over the world?
I'm going to tell you how.
I spent my entire career
making renewables a reality.
I worked in the private energy sector,
in government, in the third sector,
and after many years,
I learned that the key to making
the energy transition
work in emerging markets
all comes down to helping investors
protect their investments
and building trust where there's not any.
It's basic.
It's a step one of real-world economics.
But keep that framing
in your mind for a while
and let's look at Argentina
as our case study.
When I was starting out
thinking about renewables,
I was always asking myself two things.
Why were we using fossil fuels
instead of our incredible
renewable resources?
And why was my country
experiencing recurrent economic crises?
And I found that both
questions were connected.
Fossil fuels are easy, practical
and for a long time
has been the obvious choice.
A lot of concentrated energy,
just dirty.
But who really cares, right?
On the other side,
renewables require
significant upfront investment
for them to produce
clean energy for decades
at almost zero operational cost,
which makes them competitive
against fossil fuels,
but only in the long term.
Long-term investments
are really the challenge
in risky markets like Argentina.
As for the second question,
the economic crisis, get this.
I always knew that this
was because of politics
and what I call mismanagement.
But there was something else there.
Energy.
Argentina is a country super rich
in natural resources,
but we've been importing
fossil fuels for decades.
And of course,
fuels that had to be paid for
with money that we never had.
So it became clear to me
that if we really want
to make the energy transition work,
we have to finally find a way
to get private investment
into the long term.
And if we could do it,
we can tackle both things at once.
Climate change
and the economic strain
of spending hard currency we don't have
in importing energy
we don't actually need.
Argentina has tried four times since 1990
to develop its renewable resources
and failed each time because, of course,
the transition from
fossil fuels to renewables
doesn’t happen because someone like me,
here, on a TED Talk, says it should.
It happens because it is convenient.
And convenient,
particularly in emerging markets,
means economically viable
for both the buyer and the seller.
And here's where I found that my country
was one of the hardest countries
where to invest long term in the world.
But why?
Because historically,
we had the habit of changing
the rules halfway through.
Can we imagine what it means
to convince an investor to put their money
into something that spans
multiple administrations,
four, five?
Listen, we have five presidents
in ten days in the early 2000s.
(Laughter)
It's just too risky.
So the rule here
is a short-term investment rule.
And when you want to build
your wind or solar farm
and get your investment back
in only a few years,
the result is that the unit
of energy is too expensive
and is not competitive
against fossil fuels.
So here we go.
Renewables are expensive.
Of course not.
But we need to build them
in the long term,
there's no other way to do it.
So I decided to try to change that,
and I started working
from the civil society
in creating a legal framework,
a political umbrella,
that would allow
all the factions in my country
to rally behind one single cause.
We needed to develop our incredible
renewable resources,
consume less fossil fuels,
and save on our energy balance.
We needed a program
that cannot be easily undone
by a change in government control.
We needed a national cross-party policy
in which everyone agrees
that renewables must happen,
not because [they] are clean
or green or fancy,
but because [they] are convenient.
It took me huge effort, frustration
more than two years,
but I did it.
We managed to convince
almost every member in Congress
to support a national
renewable energy law.
(Applause)
Something that, as you can imagine,
felt nearly impossible
in a country marked
by deep political polarization
and the oil and gas industry
fighting us at every step.
But we did it because
the argument was clear, easy.
It would be economically beneficial
for the nation if we started
by demonstrating to investors
a true political consensus
and a long-term unity.
Long story short, the law was passed by
with 94 percent of support
in both chambers.
Historic.
(Applause)
This is me.
(Laughter)
And with that in my hand,
I moved to the next phase
of the plan: implementation.
I had the privilege of being invited
to join the executive branch,
the Ministry of Energy,
to design a program that can really
change the course of our energy future.
And I knew where to start.
We had to improve the credit rating
of the energy program
and shift it out of the credit
rating of the country.
Because by doing so,
we would bring international
capital to the game
and prices would go down from A to B,
making renewables competitive
against fossil fuels.
So we designed a unique scheme
of investment guarantees,
something that I love to call
the worst-case scenario waterfall.
It consists of three steps.
The first one, what we call
the energy payment guarantee.
It is basically a fund,
established in advance by the government
to pay the seller of the energy,
like the investors behind
the wind or the solar farm,
for any payment that the buyer,
like the utility,
cannot pay for whatever reason.
Interesting.
But we knew that this was not enough.
Because we know
that the government of Argentina
has frequently halted currency conversions
and restricted money transfers abroad
in past economic crises.
So we had to offer an extra layer
of protection to the investors.
We structured a second step,
what we call the early termination
payment guarantee.
We structured treasury notes
that we granted to investors in advance
before they commit their investment.
We told them that no matter
what the government decides to do,
they will get their investment back.
That's beautiful.
But still, something was missing here.
Because we knew that we needed to bring
international capital to the game.
So far, we've been
protecting the investors
from problems within Argentina,
but not from Argentina
defaulting on its obligations
as unfortunately had happened in the past.
And if there's something
money has, it's memory.
So we decided to offer
a third-step guarantee,
what we call the international backstop,
to backstop the obligations
of the sovereign government.
We negotiated a 750 million dollars
with the World Bank,
one of the least risky
institutions in the world.
In other words, we told investors
that no matter what's going on,
they will get their investment back
in the currency of their choice,
wherever in the world they would like.
So now, it's a different thing, right?
So the water of international
finance could start flowing.
But what does this really mean
in practical terms?
Before I took office,
Argentina was negotiating contracts
at the 350-dollar range
in the solar business.
Long-term contracts
but short-term view.
Super expensive.
And of course, not competitive
at all against fossil fuels.
Not convenient.
In less than six months,
we brought prices down
by a factor of seven,
to the 50-dollar range.
(Applause)
We brought 11 billion dollars
into the economy.
In the wires,
more than 200 projects all
around the country
are making today
a place where on some days,
nearly 40 percent of its electricity
comes from wind and solar.
And drum roll, please.
The country --
(Applause)
is saving today
over two billion dollars
in hard currency per year.
This is more than 40 billion dollars
in the life of the assets,
equivalent to the entire debt
that the country has with the IMF,
the largest in the world by far.
(Applause)
More than 300 million tons of CO2 avoided.
This is the real impact
of what a well-structured
and trustworthy program can offer.
But I knew that this was not
only a problem affecting Argentina.
More than 70 percent of the countries
in the world suffer about the same.
So I decided to leave
the government a few years ago
and with the support
of Climate Breakthrough,
I created a nonprofit organization
to support governments in emerging markets
with the design and implementation
of renewables at scale.
I wanted to offer others
what I would have loved
to have when I took office,
and I didn't have.
Someone, a real partner,
that can help me design the path forward,
craft the documents with me.
Someone that can give me access
to a world-class team of experts
with real, hands-on experience
in structuring projects
all around the world,
and particularly, renewable energy
projects in emerging markets.
Someone that can give me tools,
concrete tools, like the iTrust,
our guarantee fund,
established and ready to use.
It is called RELP, in short
for real and possible.
And we work across emerging markets
in Southeast Asia,
supporting governments in Africa,
in Latin America and the Caribbean.
And we won't stop until we see renewables
in every single wire and beyond.
(Cheers and applause)
The key is to create stability,
build trust
and design programs
that can really make renewables
not just the right thing to do,
but the most convenient thing
to do everywhere.
Thank you.
(Cheers and applause)